1. What is Jenkins?
Jenkins is an open-source automation tool used to build, test, and deploy code. It helps developers automate the software development process — especially Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Deployment (CD).

✅ Example:
If you push new code to GitHub, Jenkins can automatically pull the code, build it using Maven, test it, and deploy it to a server — all without manual work.

2. How do you create a Jenkins job?
To create a job in Jenkins:

Go to Jenkins Dashboard → New Item
Enter a job name (e.g., MyApp-Build)
Choose a type (usually Freestyle project)
Click OK
Configure build steps (like Git checkout, Maven build)
Click Save
Run it using Build Now

✅ Example:
You can create a job that runs mvn clean package every time new code is pushed.

3. What is Maven used for?
Maven is a build tool for Java projects. It helps in:
Compiling code
Managing dependencies (libraries)
Running tests
Packaging the app (like .jar or .war files)

✅ Example:
In a Java app, instead of downloading libraries manually, Maven uses the pom.xml file to handle them for you.

4. How does Jenkins use build tools like Maven?
Jenkins can run Maven commands as part of a build job.
You configure the Maven version in Jenkins
In a job, you tell Jenkins to run Maven goals like clean install or package
Jenkins uses those commands to build your project

✅ Example:
Inside Jenkins job → add build step:
Invoke top-level Maven targets → Goals: clean package

5. What is the difference between compile and package in Maven?
compile: Only compiles the Java source code.

package: Compiles the code and creates a .jar or .war file.

✅ Example:
If you run:
mvn compile
→ You only get .class files.

If you run:
mvn package
→ You get target/hello-1.0.jar

6. Where do you configure tools in Jenkins?
Go to:
Manage Jenkins → Global Tool Configuration
There you can configure:
JDK (Java)
Maven
Git
Gradle, etc.

✅ Example:
You can add Maven 3.9.9 and name it maven, then use it in your Jenkins jobs.

7. How do you debug a failed Jenkins build?
Steps:

Open the failed job
Click Console Output

Read error messages

Identify:
Missing files?
Permission issues?
Maven errors?

✅ Example Errors:

BUILD FAILURE: Something went wrong during build.
Could not resolve dependencies: Library not found.
Permission denied: Jenkins can't access files.

👉 You may need to:

Fix code
Change file permissions
Add missing dependencies in pom.xml
Re-run the job

